If you learned math any time in the last
few centuries, you probably did a lot of
this. Pushing around numbers and letters
inside an equation until an answer pops
out. It's math with the alphabet, the
bane of every high schooler's existence.
But solving for X the way we know it has
a complicated history. And to see where
it all began, we can follow the trail of
written progress backwards
until that trail ends
here with this scholar.
He's writing a practical manual of
arithmetic for judges and merchants.
But then he goes further, laying a
foundation that would be passed down for
centuries and would one day make the
modern world possible. The scholar is
Muhammad Iben Musa alqarazzmi
and his book was known for short as
alabra
algebra. But all those symbols that we
take for granted would have been
considered absurd 1200 years ago.
>> It's a semiodic monstrosity which nobody
would have ever thought of.
>> So where did this first algebra book in
history come from? And why does it look
so strange to us today?
This is a story in three parts and it
begins during a time of lavish
government funding for science.
By the turn of the 9th century, the
Abbasad Caliphate was arguably the
largest empire in the world and its
leaders had started a massive project to
collect and translate the great works of
ancient wisdom from within its borders
and beyond.
literature and philosophy from Persia in
the northeast of the empire, astronomy
and arithmetic brought by visiting
scholars from India east of the empire,
and Greek philosophy and mathematics
from ancient texts, some of which had
long been held by Christian scholars
within the caliphate. In the middle of
this sprawling multithnic empire were
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. And
between these rivers on the banks of the
Tigris was Madinat As Salam, the city of
peace, also known as Baghdad.
This capital of the empire was only a
few decades old, but it was already the
largest and richest city in the world.
Protected by a giant moat and a massive
circular brick wall, the architects of
the city of peace must have known that
Baghdad's future wouldn't always be
peaceful. While some claim that the
circular layout of the city was a
tribute to Uklid, the great Greek
geometer, that is unlikely because even
though Uklid's work was already a
thousand years old, the first Arabic
translation of the elements didn't
appear until at least a decade after
Baghdad's founding.
But this landmark work from the ancient
Greeks would cast a long shadow over the
emerging discipline of algebra. See,
today we know basic algebra as a
powerful general system for finding
answers to a wide range of problem types
using the efficient manipulation of
symbols which represent variables and
undetermined values. Because we can do
things like writing and solving general
formulas and graphing functions, we use
basic high school algebra all the time
to model all sorts of phenomena from
physics to economics. But for most of
algebra's history, it was just a way to
find unknown numbers. And every other
part of what we think of as algebra came
together gradually across different
times and places.
But all the while lingering in the
background was the ideal of mathematical
rigor set out in Uklid's elements and
its approach to axiomatic deductive
reasoning. This is the idea that you can
start with a few simple assumptions and
build absolute knowledge bit by bit
using proofs constructed in a series of
logically undeniable steps. As long as
you can accept the starting assumptions
and you give a proof with no logical
flaws, then a mathematical theorem is
absolutely true. This approach made math
and specifically geometry different from
other branches of science and
philosophy. But for algebra whose focus
for many years would be solving problems
involving numbers, reaching this
standard would face major hurdles.
Within Uklid's elements, books 1 through
6 and 10 through 13 deal with geometry,
while books 7, 8, and 9 are about number
theory. The categories are kept separate
from one another because the rules for
shapes and magnitudes are completely
different from the rules for numbers.
Geometric magnitudes are continuous
while numbers are made of discrete
indivisible units. So they don't allow
for things like irrational values or
even fractions. And a proof that works
within geometry doesn't necessarily also
work for numbers. So in Uklid's
geometry, he never gives anything in
numerical measurement. This separation
between the study of numbers and the
study of geometry was a key pillar of
ancient Greek mathematical philosophy.
But if you wanted to build a house or
calculate a financial transaction, picky
theoretical distinctions between numbers
and magnitudes don't really matter. This
tension between being useful in the real
world and meeting this idea of
theoretical rigor would hang over
algebra for centuries to come. But the
scholars of the Abbasid translation
movement would have also known about
another tradition of far older math
whose origins were much closer to home.
And this tradition would ultimately give
Alqurzmi an intuitive way to demonstrate
some of his algebra. Because scattered
everywhere in the region, mixed in with
the ruins of past cities from ancient
Mesopotamia, were indestructible clay
tablets that revealed the rich legacy of
Babylonian math. These tablets were dug
up and translated in the 19th century.
But it's thought that these traditions
survived into medieval Baghdad. This
math revealed powerful techniques for
solving complex problems, including
those that we'd described today, using
quadratic equations. Here's how it
works. Let's say you've got a rectangle
and you want to find its dimensions. You
know it has an area of 39 and you know
that its width is 10 units longer than
its length. This tablet gives a problem
with this exact setup, but I've changed
the numbers to simpler ones. We start
with a big rectangle whose area is equal
to 39. And we break it into two pieces.
A square with sides equal to the unknown
length and a rectangle which is 10 units
wide by that same unknown length. And
then we break the rectangle into two
equal pieces like this. So now we've got
two rectangles which each have one side
with the unknown length and the other
side with a length of five. And if we
rearrange them so they're attached to
the sides of the square, then we get
this L shape. And we can think of this
shape as being like a bigger square
which has a chunk missing. Because we'd
split the rectangle in half, we know
that that missing part is itself also a
square with sides of length 5. And
filling that in means we're adding 5 * 5
= 25 to the total area. In other words,
we've completed the square.
Since 39 + 25 gives us a total area of
64, this is an 8x8 square. And since we
know that the sides of this square are
equal to our unknown value + 5, then the
length of the unknown side is three.
This approach to problem solving is
sometimes known as Babylonian cut and
paste geometry.
Today we solve problems like this using
modern algebraic notation which can
represent a general quadratic equation
in the form ax^2 + bx + c= 0. Following
this Babylonian completing the square
method with our notation gives us the
modern quadratic formula.
Except we allow for negative numbers and
the Babylonians didn't. But it would be
a mistake to say that we can understand
much of anything about how the
Babylonians thought about their math by
writing it that way because for them
this really was about cutting up shapes
and moving them around to solve
problems. Each tablet describes a
different ad hoc solution to a different
problem. And the idea that these
relationships could be represented by
general equations and that these
equations could then be solved by
applying some kind of unified method is
nowhere to be found here. Not only that,
but the Babylonians didn't write about
practical uses for quadratics. There's
no textual evidence here or within Greek
mathematics of quadratic relationships
being used to solve any real world
problems.
One historian thinks that the
Babylonians mostly studied problems like
this to help the educated elite train
their minds and develop problems solving
skills. Turns out that math teachers
really have been saying the same things
for 4,000 years. But we know that math
is good for more than just mental
exercise. And in Baghdad, if you knew
where to look, you would find people
doing practical math, too.
As difficult as it was for Abbasid
scholars to track down ancient wisdom,
these days it seems like you can find
out anything about anyone online. My
partner and I Googled our names recently
and we instantly found all kinds of
personal data about our family. Phone
numbers, past and current addresses,
phone numbers and addresses of extended
family, you name it. And that was just
from a quick search. I'd never tried to
scrub my data from the internet before
and I thought it would be a complicated
process. So, I was amazed by how simple
it turned out to be with the help of
this video's sponsor, Incogn. Incogn
automatically and simultaneously
searches hundreds of known data brokers,
online directories, people search sites,
and more for your personal information
and sends takedown requests on your
behalf. Then, they stay with it over
time, sending follow-up requests to
ensure that removals stick and
continuously monitoring for new
exposures so your information doesn't
resurface. It's a hands-off system that
takes care of everything for you. But if
you do happen to find something that
Incogn missed, then with the Incogn
unlimited plan, all you have to do is
copy the link, drop it in the dashboard,
and click submit, and the team will
start working on getting rid of that
data immediately. It can't take things
down from government sites or social
media, but this is the perfect solution
for easily getting your information out
of the hands of data brokers. They can't
harm you if they can't find you. Use
code cyverson at the link below and get
60% off an annual plan. Back in 9th
century Baghdad, the theoretical math
used by Uklid and the Babylonians wasn't
the kind of math that would be useful
for people's daily life. If you wanted
to find math like that, you'd have to
look somewhere else entirely. Because as
goods flowed into the city, merchants
calculated prices for their wares,
architects worked out dimensions for new
constructions, and judges divvied up
estates according to mathematical rules
dictated by the Islamic laws of
inheritance. And the practitioners of
these time-honored trades were experts
at the calculations required for their
daily work. Skilled trades people could
do powerful mental math. And when they
needed to keep track of intermediate
values for larger computations, they
would have either used a technique
called finger reckoning to record the
big numbers. Or they might have used
Indian notation on an erasable
dustboard.
But the only reason we know about this
stuff at all is because later scholars
wrote about it. But the field of
practical arithmetic included more than
just the basic operations that we think
of today. It also included problems
solving techniques that were used to
find unknown values. One of these was
called the method of false position.
Let's say we know that a heap and its
fourth is 15 and we want to find out the
size of the original heap.
We can start by choosing a convenient
guess. Maybe we guess that the heap has
four units in it. then the heap plus a
fourth of itself gives us 5 units. Now,
that's the wrong answer to our question
because the number we're looking for is
15 units.
But scaling up our heap by a factor of
three scales the five up to the 15 that
we're looking for. And that same scaling
would mean the original value of 4
becomes 4 * 3 = 12, which is the correct
answer.
Of course, in many cases, you'd need to
scale by a fractional value depending on
the profession. fractions and even
irrational numbers like square roots
were all fair game for computation and
had been since before ancient Greek
times. These things obviously show up
when you're trying to get stuff done in
the real world. And there's no sense in
getting hung up here with picky
philosophical distinctions between
numbers and magnitudes. These
practitioners had other methods too,
like another more sophisticated
technique called double false position.
This one originated in ancient China and
used interpolation of two guesses to
effectively solve any linear equation.
And then for dealing with proportions,
there was also a method known as the
rule of three. This one is basically the
same as what you get today when you
solve an equation using cross
multiplication.
But these methods all start with a known
number or numbers and proceed forward
from there. None of them actually
involved naming and manipulating unknown
values. This is what makes them
arithmetic procedures instead of
algebraic.
But naming unknown numbers and then
doing math to them would be the key
first step towards what we think of as
solving for x. And alongside these
arithmetic traditions, there were
methods for this too. As simple as they
might seem to us today, these versatile
building blocks will give algebra its
power to solve a wide variety of
different types of problems. Start with
a balancing scale. Let's say that on one
side we have an unknown quantity which
has had five units taken out of it and
we know that what's left is equal to
three units. By naming one or more
unknowns that I'm going to do
mathematical operations with, I've left
the realm of arithmetic and entered the
realm of algebra.
I can restore the full value of this
unknown by adding the five units back.
And when I maintain the balance with the
other side of the scale, I get my
answer. I can also bring quantities of
the same type to the same side of an
equation to simplify. This is what's
best translated as confrontation. Let's
pretend we have two unknown things on
this side and that they're equal to one
unknown thing plus four coins on the
other. If we confront the like terms on
opposite sides of the equation to remove
them, then we get our solution. These
operations of restoration and
confrontation were known as aljabra and
al mukabella.
Even though these ideas weren't new,
they'd surely been floating around for
millennia. The rules had never been
explicitly named and written down in a
book. Books were still the domain of
scholars, and these methods had been
passed down through the centuries within
oral traditions by trades people
teaching the skills of their profession
to the next generation.
But oral traditions are fragile. If the
practitioners of these methods were to
dwindle in number or if the lines of
transmission were to somehow break then
these practices could be lost forever
and in 812 civil war came to the city of
peace. The caiff Harun al-Rashid who had
ruled the empire for over 20 years
during a golden age of prosperity and
culture had died 4 years earlier and he
left the caliphate to one of his sons
Alamin. But Alamin was a weak ruler who
felt threatened by his half-brother
Al-Mamoon, who was next in line for the
throne.
So when Alamin tried to remove Al-Mamoon
from the line of succession, the ensuing
conflict spiraled into a civil war,
culminating in a year-long siege of
Baghdad.
By September of 813, Al-Mamoon's army
penetrated the city's walls, executing
Al Amin and taking the throne.
But this wasn't the end of the city's
troubles. The war had devastated the
civilian population, many of whom lived
outside of the circular walls, and
Alamoon's newfound hold on power was
initially fragile. Parts of Baghdad were
in ruins, and the instability meant that
the caliphate was beginning to lose its
centralized authority over its sprawling
empire. But gradually, Al-Mamoon
consolidated his power. And once he did,
he sought to finish what his father had
started, setting the empire on a renewed
path of scientific inquiry. He
accelerated the translation initiative,
and he encouraged new scientific work to
flourish. In doing so, he brought some
of the empire's best and brightest
scholars to Baghdad. This central role
of Baghdad in Abbasid intellectual life
is often credited to the house of
wisdom. Though the implication that this
was some kind of translation bureau or
university is now thought to be a myth
that was created later in Europe. But in
any case, one scholar who worked in
Baghdad was Muhammad Iban Musa Al
Korasmi.
Very little is known about Al Korasmi's
life. We do know that he was of Persian
descent and either he or his ancestors
came from Quarism, a remote but
prosperous region which is now part of
Turk Manistan and Usuzbekiststan.
He was Muslim but it's possible that he
converted from Zoroastrianism.
In any case, Alurasmi soon found himself
working in Baghdad at the forefront of
geography, astronomy and astrology, not
to mention mathematics. So when the
caiff wanted to codify the practical
oral math that already existed in the
streets and marketplaces of the city, he
turned to Al Horazmi. And while Al
Porzmi would do what Al-Mamoon asked to
make clear what was impenetrable and
make easy what was difficult, he had his
own plans too. Because in writing his
manual of algebra, Al Corazmi would
bring together the practical oral
traditions of solving linear equations
with the ancient theoretical techniques
of solving quadratics into a single
flexible framework. And while this
framework would give the template for
teaching basic algebra for centuries,
its emphasis on practicality also meant
that Uklitian style rigor would be
forever out of reach.
Let's take a look at the book itself and
use modern language for a minute to talk
about what's inside. Alorazmi's book is
a textbook for solving linear and
quadratic equations. Negative numbers
and zero weren't acceptable as solutions
at the time. And while terms could be
subtracted from each other, Alcorasmi
catalogs his equations into six
canonical types where the only
operations being used are addition.
Three are simple equations like this
which only have two terms each and are
straightforward to solve. Each one gives
a single solution that's greater than
zero. Then there are three compound
equations which have three terms each.
Here the terms are moved around so that
there's no subtraction and he only
considers versions that can give a
positive solution. For each of these he
gives an algorithm to solve the equation
followed by a geometric demonstration to
show that his steps work. The next part
of the book has a bunch of
simplification rules like how to expand
binomials and how to do things like
simplify square roots. But weirdly,
despite the title of the book, he never
directly explains the alljabra and all
mukabola procedures in here. You have to
pick that up from context, I guess. But
that's not the only strange thing about
this book. The structure itself is
weird, too. He puts the six equation
types first and then waits till later to
explain the more basic simplification
rules, even though you need those to get
your equation into one of the six types.
It's backwards from how anyone would
ever teach it. Other later algebra books
do present things in what we would call
the proper order. You introduce the
names of the unknown. You explain how
operations work on them. You explain
equations and how to simplify them. And
then you get to the six equations and
their solutions. Alorasmi doesn't do
that. He starts with the six equations.
And my guess and and the guess of some
other people also is that that was
really his baby. He's very likely the
person who classified those equations
and came up with those proofs. So he
wanted to put that in the forefront and
he put that right in the beginning.
>> This pattern of classifying equations
and then giving the solution method for
each one would become a template for
centuries of later authors even after
they extended their methods to higher
degree polomials. Next, like any good
textbook, he's got a bunch of example
problems. These are set up so that you
can use the simplification rules to
reduce each equation down to one of the
six types. and then you go to the
beginning of the book and follow the
steps for solving that type to get the
solution. He starts with a bunch of
general equation solving problems and
contrived sounding word problems
involving quadratics. And then he has
chapters with applied problems from
different disciplines like commerce,
geometry, and the math involved with
complex Islamic inheritance scenarios.
But all of these applied problems are
solvable with linear equations. He
doesn't actually give any examples of
applied quadratics problems. As useful
as quadratics are for us today, even in
Alorazmi's time, they were still
basically just a theoretical exercise.
Now, to Alorazmi, the way I've been
describing everything here, using
equations with variables and general
coefficients like a, b, and c would have
made no sense. His book cataloges a
series of rules and justifications for
solving different equation types. But
this algebra is still miles away from
the algebra that we know where letters
are used to represent either variables
or unknown constants which gives us
everything from a way to express general
formulas to the ability to work with
things like functions. In fact, those
things would have been impossible in
Alorazmi's time for two very specific
reasons.
The first was the nature of books
themselves.
>> People had a different relationship with
books back then. That's what that's what
it is. Books for transcriptions of
lectures and you can have illustrations
in the books like in Nucleus Elements
you have diagrams that but the diagrams
are not part of the running text. Well,
today a math book can use abstract
notation to efficiently convey complex
ideas that are difficult to recite out
loud. At this time, aside from a few
simple diagrams, everything in a book
was written out in words, even the
numbers. But this isn't to say that
Arabic mathematicians never wrote down
math in symbols
>> because they were using the symbols on a
dustboard to work things out. But then
if you wanted to communicate that
calculation in a book, you have to write
everything out in words. You have to
describe it. That's what Alarasmi does.
He describes the processes.
>> But the differences between medieval
algebra and the algebra that we know run
much deeper than just words versus
symbols. Alorasmi would have considered
it impossible to write a general
quadratic equation because of something
even more fundamental. Numbers. Remember
the Greeks and their careful separation
of numbers from geometry? Well, part of
that was because numbers in preodern
mathematics didn't mean the same thing
that they mean to us today.
At this time, numbers weren't abstract
things that just existed in and of
themselves. There's no number three
that's just out there floating around in
the universe or existing on a number
line. Instead, three is an adjective
which needs to modify a noun. You can
have three rugs or three vases, but you
can't just have three on its own.
And you can't have a negative number of
a tangible thing either. It's a little
bit like how we use a word like dozen
today. You could have a dozen eggs or a
dozen bagels, but you would never say,
"Think of the number dozen." So,
medieval numbers come in what's called
quantity species pairs. And you need
both parts for the syntax to make sense.
This means that when it comes time to
define our unknown numbers, what we call
variables, they have to follow the same
quantity species syntax.
For us, when we write something like 3x,
the x stands for a number. The three is
a number. And the three and the x are
understood to be multiplied together.
Right? Well, in Arabic, when they said
three things, things is not a number.
Things is a kind of number. If I say
three dollars, that's not three
multiplied by dollars. Three is just how
many dollars you have. Instead of just
having some abstract number X floating
in the ether, the unknown is a species,
a specific unknown thing where you can
then have some quantity of those unknown
things.
Alorazmi refers to his constant numbers
using the unit of durhams which was a
type of money but here it just meant
sort of a generic unit. Then he called
his unknowns she meaning thing and
sometimes he also used the word jer
meaning root. But then squared unknown
values were a different species of
thing. So he gave these the term maul.
Then the relationship between these
three items becomes a little bit like
the relationship between different
denominations of currency. Just like you
can have eight pennies, three nickels
and two quarters. You have some number
of Durham Shay and Maul.
The unknown sheay works a bit like a
mystery denomination where we don't know
its value. And then the mall is like a
different denomination whose worth is
equal to the sheay multiplied by itself.
And for this reason they could not have
undetermined coefficients. This this is
a major consequence of this because well
for us if you look at the bx the b and
the x are both numbers right. Well if
you're thinking about it in Arabic terms
like how many things do you have? You
you can't there's no word or or symbol
to designate an unknown amount.
>> Remember the unknown sheay is a species
not a quantity. So the notation allows
for describing an unknown species but
not an unknown quantity.
>> It's not just their notation. It's the
whole way they conceived of monomials
and polomials. Their notation reflects
their understanding. So if you wanted to
say bx, you'd have to have a way to
represent just the quantity and not the
whole quantity species pair because you
can't have 10 units things. That's like
saying 10° dollars. It's a semiotic
monstrosity which nobody would have ever
thought of. So instead of writing
symbolic formulas using undetermined
coefficients like we do, Alorazmi leads
by example, giving specific sample
problems that the reader would
extrapolate to other situations.
>> It's very clear from examples that he
has a general rule and he's explaining
the general rule in terms of a
particular example.
>> Alorazmi's case number four is amal plus
a root equal to a constant. For this
one, he uses the example that we would
write as x^2 + 10 x = 39. Here's a look
at the procedure as he describes it.
After he gives these steps, he gives two
geometric demonstrations, one of which
we've seen before,
because it's exactly the same as the
procedure that's described on that
ancient Babylonian clay tablet.
But Alorasmi can't just demonstrate
completing the square once for this one
example. His classification system has
three different compound quadratic
equations and the first demonstration
only works for the first case. So each
of the other cases needs a new
demonstration. Here's one more for case
number five when the square and the
constant are on one side and the unknown
is on the other. Let's say we have a
square + 21= 10 * the unknown root.
First, we'll construct a square whose
sides are equal to the unknown. And then
we can add onto it a rectangle with an
area of 21.
We don't know this rectangle's exact
width since the length of it is the
unknown value. But what we do know is
that since the length of this big
rectangle is the unknown value, its
total width must be 10. The next step is
to divide this long rectangle in half.
So each piece is five by the unknown
length. Then we get this little margin,
a piece of the rectangle that's been cut
off and is on the same side as the
square. Let's copy that little piece and
move it up here to the top. The area of
this L-shaped region is still 21. And
the little missing region is a square
whose side length is the same as this
length down here. If we could find that
length, then we'd be able to find our
unknown. We know that this big shape is
a square with an area of 25 because we
know that this length plus the unknown
is once again five. That means that the
area of the little square has to be 25 -
21 = 4. So this is a 2x two square. If
that bit has a length of 2, then we can
find that our unknown value must be
three.
Now you might want to go through this
demonstration using modern notation. If
you do that, you'll see that in the end
we get the quadratic formula just like
we did with the demonstration of case 4.
But you might also notice a problem
because unlike the other example, this
equation has two positive solutions. In
fact, at the start, we assumed that the
rectangle with the area of 21 would be
wider than the side length of the
square, meaning that splitting the
figure in half would split the rectangle
like this. But if we assume the other
scenario instead, now the width of the
rectangle is smaller than the side
length of the square. So splitting the
figure in half splits the square
instead. With this setup, we can also
get a valid demonstration and the
correct second solution.
While Alorasmi notes that you can get a
second solution, it was up to other
authors around the same time to actually
write out the full demonstration for all
cases. Now to Alurasmi, the point of
these demonstrations was to convince a
practitioner, not a theoretical
mathematician that his techniques work.
So the rigorous and complicated style of
Uklid's elements didn't serve his
purposes and he used the more intuitive
cut and paste methods of the Babylonians
instead. After all, Uklid needed 30
propositions, four definitions, five
postulates and five common notions just
to build a square. Not only that, but
Alurasmi is freely switching back and
forth between the world of numbers and
the world of geometry here. Remember
that for the Greeks, the distinction
between numbers and magnitudes was a
foundational idea. Mixing discrete
numbers with continuous magnitudes
breaks everything. Later mathematicians
would try for centuries to close the gap
between uklitian rigor and algebraic
practicality. But in the end, this
fundamental structural divide would be
impossible to overcome.
In the years that followed, Arabic
algebra flourished and subsequent
generations of mathematicians made major
breakthroughs. Abu Kamill expanded on
Alcorasmi's work. His book demonstrated
examples using irrational coefficients
and solutions where Alurazmi's examples
only used integers and fractions. Abu
Kamill also tried to ground some of his
rules in Uklid's elements, but the
tensions were apparent. Later, Alcaraji
wrote Uklitian style proofs for his
algebra, but then he had to follow that
book up with another shorter one that
was more practical because the Uklitian
theory was too complicated for
practitioners.
Alcaraji also started a movement towards
what we'd call the arithmetization of
algebra. The idea that you can do the
same arithmetic operations on unknowns
that you can do with numbers. Not only
that, but he laid out what we now know
as the binomial theorem and what we call
Pascal's triangle. Much later, Al Samoal
expanded on Alcaraji's project. For
example, he gave a rule for taking the
square root of a polomial with
subtracted terms. And separately, Omar
Cayam used geometric methods to expand
algebra, including classifying the 14
forms of cubic equations and using the
intersections of conic sections to find
their solutions. In all, the lineage of
Arabic algebra formed a rich tradition
that continued for the next 600 years
after Al Korasmi. But other than Al
Kurasmi and Abu Kamill, none of this
work would be known outside of the
Arabic world until the 1800s.
While the Abbasa translation movement
led to a golden age of mathematical and
scientific progress for the centuries to
come, the early 9th century ended up
being the high watermark for the Abbasid
caliphate itself.
The end of Almoon's reign marked the
beginning of a slow decline of the power
and reach of the empire. Less than a 100
years after Alorazmi wrote his algebra
book, the circular walls of Baghdad were
completely destroyed. Today, no remnants
of the ancient circular city remain.
Modern historians can't even agree on
exactly where it was located. But during
the 10th century, the rival Umiad caiffs
in Spain had built one of the largest
libraries in the world. And they had
sent emissaries east to buy books from
within the Abbasid caliphate, including
the works of Alurazmi and Abu Kamill.
After the fall of the Umiads, 12th
century Europeans discovered these books
and Alcarasmi's algebra would be
translated into Latin by Robert of
Chester in 1145 and then later by Gerard
of Cremona around 1170. By then, this
math was totally outdated within the
Abbasid caliphate. But it would take
Europe another few centuries to catch up
to what Abbasid mathematicians had
already accomplished. In 1202, Fibonacci
wrote Liber Abachi, the first major
European text on algebra and arithmetic.
He had picked up this Arabic math in his
travels, and his book used example
problems from Abu Kamill. But his book
didn't explicitly credit any Arabic
mathematicians. At this time, algebra
wasn't taught in the medieval
universities because it was a practical
tool for trades people as exemplified by
the Italian abbisonist tradition.
Sometimes called the last of the
abbists, Luca Pacioli published his suma
de arithmetica in 1494. It was a
comprehensive volume covering the six
equation types from alqurzmi via
fibonacci along with the methods of
Italian abbcists. Pacioli famously
declared that the general cubic equation
was unsolvable.
But soon mathematicians like Tartaglia,
Cardano and Bombelly found solutions to
cubic and even cordic equations using
novel methods like imaginary numbers.
Throughout these years numbers and
monomials still referred to quantity
species pairs and different degrees of
unknowns had names like kosa, chenzo and
kubo. So writing a polomial still
involved writing complicated partially
rhetorical expressions. And even though
algebra was useful for finding the right
answer, finding rigorous mathematical
truth still meant doing uklitian style
proofs with axiomatic deductive
reasoning. That ancient division from
the Greeks holding that numbers and
magnitudes were completely separate from
each other meant that numerical algebra
would never meet the standards of
uklitian rigor. For example, geometric
constructions were still the only way to
rigorously handle things like irrational
values. So in 1591, Francois Viet
introduced the idea of making an algebra
for geometry. He said that algebra had
been spoiled and defiled by the
barbarians, meaning Arabic
mathematicians. He even tried to get rid
of the name, calling it the analytic art
instead of algebra. By tying his
unknowns to geometric magnitudes instead
of numbers, he was able to move algebra
towards the status of a theoretical
science rather than a practical art. But
it still didn't resolve the fundamental
issue of numbers versus magnitudes.
In the process, Viet introduced the use
of letters for both unknown and general
coefficients. His work would set the
stage for Renee Deart, who first used
superscripts for exponents, A, B, and C
for known constants, and X, Y, and Z for
unknown values. By the second half of
the 18th century, Leonard Oiler's work
expanded the capabilities of algebra and
in the process gave us the standardized
notation that we still would recognize
today.
Although by today's standards, even
Oilers's algebra falls short of what we
consider to be fully rigorous.
Ultimately, Uklid's elements would have
to be abandoned altogether as the
arbiter of rigor in favor of a new
foundation based on abstract axioms that
aren't grounded in the tangible world.
But working our way forward through
history like this doesn't really give us
the full picture. We might be tempted to
infer transmission and influence at
times where none actually occurred. For
example, Alurasmi was not the first
person to ever write about doing
algebra.
Sometime around the mid200s AD lived the
Greek mathematician Daphantis.
Not only could he solve quadratic
relationships like the Babylonians did,
but he had devised methods to work with
indeterminate equations going up to the
9th degree. And for this reason, some
consider him to be the founder of
algebra.
A few centuries after Daphantis over in
India in the 600s lived Brahmagupta. He
used quadratic equations to solve
problems related to astronomy. And even
though he wrote out his methods in
verse, his technique for solving a
quadratic is essentially identical to
today's quadratic formula. There's no
evidence that Brahmagupta made any
attempt to justify his rules with
anything that looks like a proof. In
fact, it's clear that both Daphantis and
Brahmagupta were doing math that was
more sophisticated than Alorasmi's math.
But to understand the textual tradition,
we shouldn't just look at a
chronological series of events across
the world and say that's how things
happened. Instead, we should take a more
forensic approach and try to reconstruct
a chain of transmission.
If we put a pin at someone like Oiler,
whose work looks basically like modern
algebra and trace our way backwards,
we'll get a different picture. Many
books during these years attributed the
birth of algebra to Alqurasmi. But
sometimes they were confused about when
he lived, even imagining that he
preceded the ancient Greeks. Others said
that Alcarasmi shares credit with
Daphantis as well as a third guy named
Jebber, sometimes Jebber the Arab. It
turns out that Jebber was actually just
a mistransation of the word algebra. But
when we actually trace which books
influenced which the paths all point
back to Alurasmi where the trail
abruptly stops. Because within these
lines of transmission, no book of
algebra precedes Alqurasmi's condensed
book on calculation by restoration and
confrontation. When we look at it this
way, even Daphantis comes after Al
Korasmi. Because even though Daphantis
lived about 600 years earlier, his work
wasn't translated and read by Arabic
mathematicians until about 870, a
generation after Alurasmi. And Daphantis
wasn't known to Europeans until much
later than that when the German
mathematician Reomantis discovered the
work around 1463.
And even though Arabic scholars did
receive astronomical texts from India
and they learned what we now call Arabic
numerals from India, Brahma Gupta's
algebraic work wasn't translated into
this lineage until later. Still Indian
mathematics continued to develop
independently into the 16th century with
mathematicians finding things like the
power series for s cosine and arc
tangent over a century before calculus
emerged in Europe. But this tradition
never spread out of southwestern India
and it seemed to abruptly die out when
the chain of transmission from teacher
to student atrophied.
So what do we make of Alorazmi the
person? Besides the handful of his books
that have survived and that went on to
plant the seeds of algebra in Europe
centuries later, almost everything about
his life is completely lost to history.
It's vanished alongside the remains of
medieval Baghdad.
But yet Al Porasmi's name and work has
lived on even beyond what I've described
in this story. In fact, if anything, his
name has grown in importance over the
years to the point where today it's
hiding in plain sight, constantly at the
tip of everyone's tongue.
Because algebra wasn't Alurasmi's only
important work, he also wrote another
book on Indian arithmetic which codified
Indian numerals and methods of
calculation for the Arab world.
When this book was translated into
Latin, it gave Europe what they later
called Arabic numerals.
The book opens with the phrase so said
alorasmi
in Latin. That's dixit algorism.
>> The algorithm.
>> The algorithm. The algorithm.
>> The algorithm.
>> The algorithm. The algorithm. The
algorithm. The algorithm. Algorithm. The
algorithm. The algorithm.
>> The algorithm.